---
layout: page
permalink: /subpage/MyPathTCM/index.html
title: My Path to Chinese Medicine
---

### From Electrical Engineering to Healing: My Path to Chinese Medicine

In the past, most Chinese high school students, including myself, had little understanding of which field of study they were passionate about or what career path they wanted to pursue. High school teachers typically did not guide students in exploring their interests either. Like many others, I simply followed the advice of relatives when it came time to choose a major for the college entrance exam (Gaokao). I ended up selecting automation, a subfield of electrical engineering, because it was often referred to as a "jack-of-all-trades" major.  

<br>In China, Gaokao students don’t have much freedom when it comes to choosing their majors. Admission is based on exam scores and the number of applicants per major. If your score isn’t high enough or there are too many applicants for a particular major, you may be forced into a different one. Changing majors is generally not allowed, unless you go through the grueling process of retaking the college entrance exam.  

<br>As I found myself immersed in numerous electronics courses, I realized that I had little interest in the subject and often found it rather dull. Our mentors frequently reminded us that even if you don't love a subject, it shouldn’t prevent you from mastering it, as doing so reflects your attitude as a student. I used to firmly believe in this notion, but now, I see it as nonsense. It’s incredibly difficult to excel at something you neither enjoy nor have a natural talent for. Not every child can become a math prodigy, and failing to excel at math doesn't mean someone lacks creativity.  

<br>At the time, however, I did my best to study my core courses, even though my grades ended up being fairly average. By the time I graduated, I still had no idea what truly interested me or what I was good at. Then, life threw me a curveball—I got sick. Yes, that was the initial catalyst that led me to consider studying Chinese medicine, but the journey from that point to actually making the decision was far from straightforward.  

<br>When I graduated from my undergraduate program, I was diagnosed with a condition known as paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT). The exact cause of this condition is often unclear, though some believe it can be triggered by certain medications. At the time, I had recurrent colds, and Chinese doctors treated me with a significant amount of antibiotics, particularly azithromycin. Shortly afterward, I began experiencing severe arrhythmia.

<br>It was hard for me to believe that this condition could be caused by medication. I thought it was just a result of poor health or lingering effects of the cold. Some doctors suspected I had myocarditis or thyroid disease, but tests for cardiac enzymes and thyroid function came back normal.

<br>It wasn’t until the past two years that I stumbled upon a post discussing the misuse of azithromycin among children in China after the COVID-19 pandemic, due to widespread mycoplasma pneumonia infections. The post highlighted that many grassroots doctors had been over-prescribing azithromycin to children, even though the drug has numerous side effects. One of the most serious side effects is QT interval prolongation, which increases the risk of arrhythmias like torsades de pointes, a type of ventricular tachycardia. Reading this, I finally felt like I had found the cause of my condition.

<br>In fact, as early as 2014, I had already come to Germany to prepare for the DSH exam at Uni Kassel, and later to pursue a master’s degree. However, two months after arriving in Kassel, I had a severe episode and was rushed to the hospital by ambulance. After some basic treatment in the emergency room, the doctors urged me to follow up with a general practitioner for further treatment. But being in a foreign country, barely able to speak German, I was terrified. I quickly booked a flight back to China.

<br>The doctors recommended surgery for my condition, but at the time, I was terrified of the idea of surgery. Since traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is deeply rooted in Chinese culture and is widely practiced in China, I decided to try TCM treatments, which included drinking herbal decoctions and undergoing acupuncture. This treatment went on for two years. I consulted various TCM doctors, both in large hospitals and in private practice, but my condition didn’t improve. In fact, it worsened, and taking herbal medicines also brought about many side effects.

<br>At the same time, I began reading a lot of TCM literature on my own and regularly watched TCM lectures on TV and online. Based on what I learned, I started to realize that my deteriorating condition might have been caused by misdiagnosis or improper treatment due to the limited skills of some of the doctors I had consulted. This led me to embark on a path of self-study in TCM. I thought to myself, if I was going to learn TCM, why not go all the way and study at a proper university that trains modern TCM doctors?

<br>So, I self-studied all the subjects required for the entrance exam to pursue a master’s degree in TCM, covering everything from Internal Chinese Medicine to Chinese Diagnostics and Pharmacology—a total of six subjects. In December 2017, I took China’s National Postgraduate Entrance Examination, known as kaoyan, and in April of the following year, I also took the entrance interview. The kaoyan exam is second only to the Gaokao in terms of competitiveness in China. The university I applied to, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, is the top institution for TCM education in the country.

<br>In the end, only 11 candidates were admitted to the program I applied for, and I ranked 5th. My competitors were all undergraduates majoring in Chinese medicine, while I came from an entirely different field. After enrolling in the university, my classmates often expressed admiration when they heard about my transition and cross-disciplinary exam experience. They would tell me how impressive it was that I managed to pass the entrance exam for one of the most competitive TCM programs without any prior background in medicine.

<br>Looking back, I think this is what people mean when they say someone is naturally good at something. Being a doctor and studying medicine requires a deep sense of empathy—the ability to feel a patient’s pain as if it were your own. Perhaps because I had experienced illness myself, I was able to truly empathize when learning how to heal others. This, in turn, allowed me to remember and understand medical knowledge more quickly and accurately.

<br>When I entered the prestigious Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, the highest institution for cultivating TCM talent, it felt as though I had stepped into a whole new world—a place where I was given a second chance. People often say that when your health isn’t good, you should study medicine. Indeed, medical universities have a healing power. Here, I found the source of medical knowledge, attended lectures by nationally renowned medical masters, and became classmates and friends with some of the top medical students, especially in such an elite medical school in Beijing.

<br>In the library of University, I immersed myself in reading classic Chinese medical texts and sat in on modern molecular biology and immunology courses alongside undergraduate students. Although I was a graduate student in TCM, the program was research-oriented, focused on publishing papers and completing a thesis project over the course of two years. The research topic I am engaged in under the guidance of my advisor is about the biomedical effects of melatonin, as well as the relationship between melatonin, traditional Chinese medicine symptoms, and treatment, and the impact of melatonin on the human circadian clock.

<br>Because our research group was small—my advisor only accepted one graduate student per year—I was essentially on my own in managing the entire process. From researching the project topic, designing the experimental protocol, conducting animal experiments, analyzing data, and writing reports, to even purchasing experimental equipment and handling reimbursement paperwork, I had to manage everything. This was an enormous challenge for someone like me, who had never conducted biomedical experiments before. I had no choice but to seek help from experienced classmates, learning step-by-step how to conduct animal experiments, and I attended molecular biology lab classes to acquire the necessary techniques for molecular experiments.

<br>Despite these challenges, I still had to accompany my advisor every week to the clinic to improve my TCM clinical skills. During this period, I was fully committed to becoming a TCM doctor. According to legal requirements for practicing TCM, I had already signed a five-year apprenticeship agreement with Professor Guo Xiazhen. Once I passed the TCM qualification exam, I would be able to officially become a licensed TCM doctor.

<br>However, during my second year of graduate school, I participated in a summer training program in Quantitative Biology hosted by Peking University, and it was as if I had been reawakened. I had always wanted to combine my undergraduate knowledge with my studies in Chinese medicine, but I hadn’t found the right point of integration. The summer program at Peking University, which took place in 2018, happened to coincide with the cusp of the artificial intelligence (AI) explosion.

<br>During the program, I attended fascinating lectures by Peking University professors and engaged in discussions with students from top universities across China. It was through these interactions that I became exposed to many cutting-edge research topics, including AI, particularly the application of deep neural networks in biomedicine. Inspired by what I learned, I spontaneously wrote a paper on the application of natural language processing (NLP) in Chinese medicine diagnosis and treatment.

<br>At that time, I hadn’t systematically studied AI, and my understanding of the technology was fragmented and incomplete. Resources on the subject were scarce, especially in the University of TCM, where access to such technical knowledge was limited. Unexpectedly, four years later, this paper became one of the most downloaded and cited articles on CNKI (China National Knowledge Infrastructure), and it was even selected as one of CNKI’s annual academic highlights. The journal that published it invited me to Malaysia for a recognition event, but I decided against attending due to my intense study and exam preparation at TU Darmstadt in Germany.

<br>The reason for the paper’s success was that, during my research, I found that there had been no prior studies applying AI—specifically NLP—to Chinese medicine at that time. As we all know, after 2019, AI entered a period of rapid development, and numerous studies combining AI with medical applications began to emerge. As a result, my earlier paper became highly cited. Looking back on this experience, I realize that I have a certain foresight and a willingness to explore cutting-edge research topics, quickly integrating them into my own field of expertise.

<br>Over time, I came to realize why I had always struggled to integrate my undergraduate studies in automation with Chinese medicine: the truth is, automation isn’t a field that naturally aligns with medicine. The disciplines that truly complement medical studies are computer science and artificial intelligence (AI). This realization led me to pursue a second master’s degree in Germany.

<br>Initially, Germany does not allow students to switch fields easily, but because I had already earned a master’s degree in medicine and had an undergraduate degree in engineering, I was able to apply for the Medical Technology program at the Technical University of Darmstadt. It wasn’t exactly what I had aimed for—I had originally wanted to study computer science, but this was the best option I could secure. Fortunately, the Medical Technology program offered a wide array of computer science and AI courses, with a very flexible curriculum. While fulfilling the basic credit requirements, I chose to focus primarily on AI-related courses and some computer science classes. It was through studying this Medical Technology program that I truly began to understand how information technology is applied to medicine.

<br>Now, as I approach graduation in Germany, my initial assumption has proven to be true: the knowledge of Electrical Engineering, simply doesn’t integrate well with medicine, but computer science does. The computer science courses I’ve taken in the Medical Technology program, largely centered around AI, have been incredibly valuable. However, I’ve come to realize that my lack of formal training in traditional computer science may become a limitation in my future career development. As a result, my academic journey isn’t over yet — I still have a long way to go. 

<br>Looking back, my undergraduate major was Automation, and it turns out I didn’t choose the wrong path after all. While I initially studied industrial automation techniques of the past, technological advancements have brought us into the age of artificial intelligence. Today, automation is still relevant, but now it is driven by AI. Whereas automation once mainly served the manufacturing sector, it can now empower the field of medicine.








